This [music] is business breakdowns.
Business breakdowns is a series of
conversations with investors and
operators diving deep [music] into a
single business. For each business, we
explore its history, [music] its
business model, its competitive
advantages, and what makes it tick.
We believe every business has lessons
and secrets that investors and operators
can learn [music] from and we are here
to bring them to you. To find more
episodes of breakdowns, check out join
colossus.com. [music] All opinions
expressed by hosts and podcast guests
are solely their own opinions. Hosts,
podcast guests, their employers or
affiliates may maintain positions in the
securities discussed in this podcast.
[music] This podcast is forformational
purposes only and should not be relied
upon as a basis for investment
decisions. [music]
This is Matt Russell and today we have a
special episode [music] breaking down
how investors are using AI. This is a
question I get from many of you. And
while there is no shortage of content on
the implications of AI, I know there's
an appetite to learn more about tangible
use cases, how to make sure you're
getting the most out of these tools, how
to think about advancements in the
technology and ensuring that you're
keeping pace with the innovation curve.
So my guest today is David Plawn,
founder of Portrait Analytics. Now,
David and Portrait have been a partner
of Business Breakdown since last year,
but I specifically asked David to do
this episode because one, he is really
front and center to how investors are
using and applying AI, but two, and
maybe more importantly, him and his team
come with a background in investing. So,
while the conversation doesn't really
focus on portrait, you'll hear
references to what him and his team are
building and how they've shaped it for
investors, you'll very much understand
when you hear David talk that he is
someone who understands the pain points
of an investor. I think everyone will
find something in this episode that will
benefit them in their day-to-day. And I
would love to hear the feedback. Now, on
to the episode.
David, I am excited to have you here to
finally do this recording. I think over
the holiday break, many investors were
spending time trying to figure out how
they can get more out of AI tools. It's
constantly evolving, but at least for a
snapshot in time, I think you'll be able
to give us some really good perspective
on use cases, some of the skill sets
that you can use to leverage the most
out of the technology. But I actually
just wanted to start out with your
background because I think this is
really unique and can speak to why I
find you such a valuable resource when
it comes to thinking about this through
the investor mindset. So can you bring
us back in time prior to Portrait, what
you were doing and how that led up to
starting this business?
>> Yeah, absolutely. Really pleasure to be
on here. So I spent my career as an
investor in a few different seats before
starting Portrait. I started at Barclays
on the trading floor in the special
situations group. Was then at a long
short hedge fund called Slate Path
Capital where I was a generalist and
most recently was at Bow Post which is a
large hedge fund based in Boston where I
was a generalist on the public markets
team doing both public equities and
distress credit. I think I probably
first got bit with the idea of using AI
within the investment research process
when I was at business school at
Stanford and this was like 2015 2017. So
deep learning was very much in the
zeitgeist. We were still pre-transformer
right up until I graduated. But it just
seemed inevitable to me at some point
that this technology would be really
impactful for a lot of the research
workflows that I went through. And after
spending a lot of time studying and
exploring and prototyping, I got the
conviction to throw myself full-time
into this project. So that's my
background leading into starting
Portrait.
>> When you think back to some of those
stints, whether it's Bow Post, Slate
Path, even potentially on the trading
floor, can you think of any scenarios
where you were spending a significant
amount of time that were pain points
that are maybe easily solved by AI
today? We'll get into some of the very
specific use cases, but I'm just curious
when you look back at that time, some of
the workflows that you had, where you
could see the biggest lift today versus
where it was 10 years ago. It's very
different today. It's interesting
because the output of an investment
research process is ultimately a
decision and hopefully a high quality
decision. It's very unlike other fields
where there is actually a widget or a
service being provided. When I thought
about the investment research process,
there were aspects of it that had
friction, but that friction was helpful
because it helped me build conviction
personally. I was one of these guys that
could never really outsource model
building. I always had to build a model
myself in order to feel conviction in
recommending a position based on that
company. But there were certainly
aspects that I'd say limited me in terms
of how productive I could be in finding
and researching the best ideas.
Essentially, I would bucket it all into
the category of there's just a ton of
information out there that I could
potentially consume. Consuming it in a
way that was efficient and additive to
the research process was challenging
just given hours in a day. So, I would
put it in the three main categories.
There's certainly idea generation. So,
finding the ideas that best fit my
mental models. I knew there were
probably dozens out there that were
totally in my sweet spot, but at any
given time, it was very hard to know if
I was working on one of those. There's
certainly the initial context building
that goes into a new idea, especially as
a generalist, not even developing a
differentiated insight, but just getting
the table stakes on how a company and an
industry works and the narrative and
business breakdowns has always been a
very useful resource. Whenever I'm
working on something that where there's
an episode, that was always a huge help.
And then I'd say lastly, just monitoring
an investment idea. As a generalist, it
was often challenging to stay on top of
not just the companies, but the
surrounding ecosystems, the customer,
suppliers, competitors, and if someone
lived in a given sector, they usually
were able to put together a real-time
mosaic based on all those data points
that they're absorbing about what was
happening in the industry and so forth.
And I always found that really
challenging as a generalist. There was
more than one earning season when I got
smacked because I was the last person to
realize that end market demand was
weakening or suppliers were pushing
prices through, those types of things.
So ultimately I would say those are the
types of workflows highle information
processing to help triage new data
points broadly speaking are the types of
things [clears throat] where AI can be
really useful and we can get into some
specific applications of that but that's
how I would think about where AI can fit
in a research process without replacing
the parts of the process that are
important for building conviction. Yeah,
I think that really resonates and seems
to align with the people that I've seen
getting the most out of it. A lot of it
is productivity and efficiency, which on
the surface level sometimes people can
poo poo, but when it comes to making
decisions and having clarity of thought
and being able to take in the most
valuable information, I think there's a
lot more to it. So, I liked the idea of
getting into some of the use cases. And
I actually wanted to start backwards in
terms of the buying process and
reference what you just brought up there
in terms of position monitoring. What
are some of the tangible use cases of AI
today that you think investors are using
or you would recommend they use to just
monitor what's in your portfolio and
stay on top of it as effectively and
efficiently as possible? I think there
are many good solutions today for
staying on top of what is happening with
an individual name. There's plenty of
ways you can add it to a watch list on
any number of services and staying on
top of all the new filings and
transcripts and news related to that
specific company. What I think
historically has been hard but now is
much simpler is being able to cast a
wider net of pulling in relevant data
points in a much sparer set of data. So
for instance, let's say you own Expedia.
One of the key investment factors for
Expedia is always going to be what's
happening in the hotel ecosystem and how
volume is trending, how pricing is
trending or what OTAAS are doing with
their distribution strategy and how it
relates to OTAAS. The challenge
historically is if you're an internet
analyst or you're a journalist following
Expedia, you probably aren't going to
want to subscribe to every piece of news
of what Marriott is saying. You don't
care what their profitability
necessarily looks like or if they're
adding new units to take share from
Hilton. What you really care about is
any specific data point which would add
to the mosaic around what is happening
in the hotel landscape with respect to
consumer demand for travel or if they're
seeing trends and market share shift
with respect to OTAAS. But historically,
it was impossible to pick up all those
data points unless you really consumed
every piece of news. There was no smart
filter on top of all that data. I think
with AI today and obviously the company
I run, Portrait, we have solutions that
target this, but even outside of
Portrait, there are plenty of ways today
to now much more efficiently pick up
those data points across that surface
area such that where today a certain
level of understanding was unique to
someone who just covered travel, you're
now able to pick that up much more
efficiently as it relates to your
investment thesis. Yeah, I can
definitely speak to that as a transport
analyst trying to monitor truckers and
knowing that there was valuable
information coming out of CPG companies
talking about freight costs. I spent
many late Thursday nights while the rest
of the world was enjoying Manhattan
happy hour control effing through these
various transcripts and earnings
releases. So, I think that is a major
one that has evolved in just the ability
to gather all of that information in a
much more efficient way and not control
effing the heck out of things. when you
next move into the building up a
research on a name or the pre-by
research process getting up to speed.
This is another one where I think it's
the widest net of possibilities. But
when you think about maybe through the
lens of how you used to approach it
versus how you're seeing other investors
approach it, what are some of the use
cases that you're seeing people
implement to really get the most out of
it and maybe build better conviction or
gather more information, whatever it
might be.
>> It's interesting because I was someone
who and still do love doing the pre-by
work. My wife likes to joke that my
favorite Saturday morning activity is
reading a 10K. And the thing that's
interesting what I mentioned before
where to me that's an important part of
the conviction building process is
building up that context and feeling
like you've read all the material and
you can start piecing together the
various data points. Where I think AI
can be really helpful in that process is
two things. One is getting you enough
information to know whether an idea
should be killed. I used to do this
accounting at the end of every year when
I was an investor. How many ideas did I
really look at? A remarkably low number
that made it through to the deep
research stage. And a lot of times I
could have killed an idea much quicker
once I had surfaced enough information
to understand there's maybe an
existential risk here. I'm never going
to be able to get past or the management
compensation is such in a way where I'm
just never going to feel comfortable
that their incentives are aligned. And
so I think where AI can be really
helpful in that process is giving you
enough baseline context to be able to
triage the idea of, oh yeah, this is
passing the initial sniff test. I want
to spend more time on it and maybe spend
12 hours reading through all the
historical content. And I'd say the
other thing that has been really helpful
is just expanding what gets moved up
earlier in the pipeline in terms of
types of analyses. So for instance, I
mentioned earlier CEO compensation. One
of the things that I would do if I was
really getting into a name is go through
the last five proxies and try to map out
what are the metrics that the CEO is
being comped on and how have those
changed and the waiting of those
changed. A lot of times that's a useful
signal into what the board is thinking
about. That's a bit of a pain. Now on
portrait is a click of a button. So
things that historically would be more
in like the deeper dive category, now I
can move up. And that to me is one of
the most powerful use cases of AI. So as
an analyst, you're able to turn over far
more rocks in a given period of time
than you would otherwise and spend more
of your deep research creative time on
ideas that you know have already passed
your initial sniff test and are worth
that time. When thinking about really
tapping into that, would that be having
a list of non-negotiables in terms of
whether it's compensation elements or
something else that you can screen
through quickly or is it you don't
necessarily know what you're going to
hit that might break it, but you're just
going to get there faster through the
various iterations of getting up to
speed. I know it's a little bit
technical, but I'm curious mostly if
there is a way that you think that you
could templatize that versus not.
>> Oh yeah, there's two categories. There's
definitely things that you can
templatize. So for instance, I mentioned
co compensation. There's certain
accounting things I would look for with
respect to like aggressive revenue
recognition or changes and certain
assumptions that would inflate figures.
And then I'd say there were patterns
that if I saw that would turn me off. So
one analysis that now is very trivial
but took a lot of time historically was
I would go back through the last 3 four
years and lay out every piece of
guidance that the management team had
given both obviously the hard specific
guidance but also anything qualitative
or soft like oh we expect revenue to
accelerate sometime in the second half
of the year and I think building up a
picture of management's guidance style
and credibility is really important and
that's the type of context that someone
who's followed a name for a long time
intuitively has that being fresh to a
name I wouldn't have. That's a situation
where if my thesis is based on some sort
of turnaround execution plan that the
management team is undertaking but I can
do the work and say oh actually over the
last three years every year they've said
they expect margins to expand and never
happens that would be enough to maybe
kill the idea depending on other
circumstances. So I think that's another
cool example of it helps I think where
AI can be really useful is surfacing
patterns that historically were pretty
painstaking to put together and now can
happen far more easily.
>> Yeah, 100%. It's a very valid point too
on the credibility. I think there's a
trust level and once investors show they
don't really trust a management team or
a stock it could be a freef fall and you
see that quite frequently.
>> Yeah. And it can be really subtle too.
There are times where if you just look
on the Bloomberg screen, it says
management beats guidance every quarter.
And then you actually dig into it, you
realize when they give fullyear guidance
in the Q1 call, they end up revising it
down quarter after quarter after
quarter. So by the time they get to Q4,
sure they're going to beat their
numbers. But if you're building your
model, looking out a year, you probably
should shade whatever management is
saying at that point subtly. Yeah,
there's effectiveness in just kitchen
sinking and taking all the pain in one
quarter and that can be better than just
consistently revising down. So there's
all types of things that to your point
feel they're definitely quantitative in
nature but the ability to extract that
information was not always easy and I
think that's an entire category where AI
is showing up. The last section is in
that sourcing of new ideas and maybe
something you alluded to before where
you have certain frameworks or
characteristics of businesses that you
really like and it's not always easy to
find all the companies out there that
fit that or to know if you're looking at
a company that might be fitting that. So
where in the idea sourcing idea
generation are you seeing AI be most
effective? And I will just mention to me
personally it feels like there's always
a step before you get to sourcing.
You're usually introduced to a name for
other reasons. But I'm curious where
you're seeing this coming into play.
There's two main ways I'm seeing
investors use AI for this type of use
case. One is understanding companies
that are exposed to a given trend or a
given development. So, for instance,
when tariffs were first announced, I
guess April of last year, there was a
lot of investors, especially on
portrait, trying to figure out which
companies are going to be most exposed.
And maybe the second order thinking is
even trickier. Which companies, for
instance, have a predominantly US-based
supply chain and their competitors have
an international supply chain. Like that
type of analysis and AI is really useful
for that. Even out of the box, there's
just a lot of world knowledge built into
a modern state-of-the-art model about
first and second order effects and who
might be affected and so forth. The more
nuance and I'd say difficult case and
where we spend a lot of time has been
working with firms to find ideas that
fit like a nuanced definition of a
mental model. So for instance in my past
life I had this mental model of
companies that were previously high
performing and there were really
attractive elements of the business
model that you could believe in and
underwrite and there was some sort of
hiccup. It could be something macro
related or really bad product cycle some
sort of execution mess up and the market
is now revaluing the franchise value of
that business. And a lot of times I
could isolate the research to that one
specific headwind and figure out if it's
temporary or not. And if it was
temporary then you could buy it. That's
a pretty nuanced thing to find. It's
really qualitative in nature because the
headline numbers are going to look bad
whether it's temporary or not in the
near term. And so finding ideas that fit
the mold of that is challenging for two
reasons. One is that just requires a lot
of qualitative reasoning along with the
figures to do that. But two, I'd say
even enunciating that clearly is hard.
When I ask a lot of investors, what are
the mental models that you think about
when finding a really attractive idea?
Some of them have been very explicit
about writing down, I'm looking for
attribute A, B, and C. But a lot of
times it's more of a feeling, right? You
know, when you see it and actually
figuring out how do you translate that
into a query, for lack of a better term,
is challenging. And that's one area
where we spend a lot of time at Portrait
as well is helping folks look at their
history and figuring out like okay what
does a 10 out of 10 idea look like for
you given your historical trading
context and firm and all of that. So I
think the combination of those two
things is difficult but when it works
it's incredible. There are few feelings
as exciting in this business as getting
served up a pitch where you're reading
it you're like oh my god yeah this is
really exciting clear my calendar I'm
going to spend the next week just
figuring this out. That's a really
magical moment and something AI has been
really helpful with.
>> Yeah, I can tell you from doing the
show, I get to experience all these
different businesses and I'm trying to
draw the patterns and match them up and
some of them come more simply than
others. The missionritical part of the
supply chain that's a small percentage
of the overall cost, but they're a
dominant player. They have all the
market share. Pricing power should be
there. That's one that's emerged and I
think gained a lot of appreciation over
time. And then there are the more subtle
ones like what you described before
which really articulating them can be
more challenging but that is an
interesting approach and actually
something that I've seen a few investors
who have a differentiated framework try
to lean into finding ways to take that
proprietary knowledge or pattern
recognition that they developed over
time and get this tool that can get the
most out of it in terms of uncovering
new opportunities. I think one of the
things that you've made clear to me in
other appearances that you made and as
we've talked is there are skill sets to
get the most out of AI. And I don't
think they're always that obvious or at
least they weren't obvious to me. But I
was hoping we could just talk through
some of the things that seem to make a
massive difference in terms of whether
investors getting the Google search
better quality output versus really
building on what they're doing becoming
massively more efficient. And the first
is just the prompt writing. So how would
you articulate how important prompt
writing is? some of the basic things
that you think benefit investors from
thinking about when going about prompts
and just feel free to wax poetic on it.
>> It's an interesting question that the
answer changes every 3 months in terms
of what makes an effective prompt
because the model capabilities change as
well as the tools available to the
models are constantly changing in the
investment research context and I think
this is true for other contexts as well
but particularly researchbased workflows
with large language models. The mental
model that I think still works really
well is imagine you were writing an
email to somebody maybe overseas who's
going to work overnight and is going to
be doing a task for you and assume
they're smart but maybe lack a lot of
context on you. What information would
you want them to have to be able to do a
good job? Then whatever you end up
writing is probably a pretty good
starting point for an effective prompt.
And to dig a little bit deeper, some of
the subcomponents when I write prompts
today, I usually outline a specific task
and why the task is happening. In the
same way where if you give an analyst
build this cost curve, they say okay, if
you say, hey, build this cost curve
because I think it might be shifting and
that could imply something about future
changes in the pricing. That's helpful.
So I usually provide some background
context. I provide a task. Depending on
the nature of what I'm looking for, I
might specify an output. I might say,
"Hey, I want your output to look like
this. Have an intro paragraph, then
outline these data points. Show me a
table that has X, Y, and Z." That
sometimes is useful. Sometimes that can
be hurtful in that you're constraining
the model's output. The same way of a
human analyst, you might want to give
them some slack on the rope to be able
to be creative and how they want to
synthesize the information. And then I
usually have a section of my prompts
where I have specific task guidelines
and then also just general domain
knowledge. So for instance, in terms of
guidelines, these are things that I
would just think about. Hey, maybe I'm
doing that guidance prompt. Make sure
you capture soft guidance that doesn't
have a specific figure on it. Because
otherwise, if you say just capture all
guidance, it's just going to capture
specific quantitative guidance. And in
terms of transferring domain knowledge,
I have like a set of bullet points that
I try to encapsulate. Here's how I think
about being an analyst and some of
things you might learn through your
experience. One of those is I always
remind the model like look, you're going
to largely be reading commentary from
management teams. They are always biased
positively. It's important you take a
skeptical eye to anything they're
saying. And even something that simple
really helps because the models have
been trained to want to be helpful and
that usually influences them to be more
positive than they otherwise should be.
So just little things like that where
you could imagine taking an eager
college student who's excited and
believes in the good and trying to
impart a little wisdom. Actually
management teams tend to inflate things
a bit. Just to wrap that up, defining
the task, the context behind the task,
some specific outputs if I want it, some
guidelines, and some kind of domain
context, I think is a really good
starting point. And if you can send that
to a human and they read it and
understand the task, you're probably
going to do pretty well with the model
as well. Yeah, the level of instruction
if you almost humanize it, that was one
of the initial things that I think you
mentioned months and months ago that
made a material change for me. And then
on the idea of context and where we'll
use an LLM, assume off-the-shelf LLM for
this question, but when you're thinking
about when to just give them massive
freedom versus when to load in
documents, how does that change the
scale and the output quality in your
experience?
>> So I think it's very task specific.
There's a few different dimensions of
which it depends upon. One is is the
nature of the task something
defined and structured and maybe more
quantitative in which case yeah it can
be a pain if you're using an
off-the-shelf solution but upload the
documents because otherwise generally
speaking an off-the-shelf model is going
to have to go crawl the web and that's
an imperfect inefficient way to gather a
bunch of structured information and
you'll most likely get hallucinations
which is why of course companies like
Portrait exist because All that stuff's
pre-loaded, but to the extent that the
goal is something more exploratory or
creative, it can still be really useful
to upload the relevant documents. But I
would explicitly instruct the model.
Hey, I don't really know which way this
answer is going to go. So pull on
threads, follow it, chase down leads.
And in that case, you can steer the
model, especially modern ones that are
quite responsive to do a lot of web
searching. Where this matters as well is
how important the task is with respect
to accuracy to usefulness. There are
certain tasks where if you're 99%
accurate, you're 0% useful. And that's
like self-driving cars where the cost of
an error is exceptionally low. So I
think of model building, like if I
presented a model that had an obvious
flaw in it to my boss in any of my past
roles, that would be pretty bad. I
certainly did that on occasion.
[laughter]
>> Two of us.
>> Yeah. Maybe you're just doing an
industry survey. What's the history of
this industry? and how's it evolved to
these three players. If there's a
factual error here or there and it's
earlier in the research process and it's
more of a triage exercise, that's okay.
I'm fine with that. Having some
calibration depending on where the task
is in the process, the importance of the
accuracy and how structured you want the
output to be. I would vary an
experiment.
>> Yeah, it's quite interesting to see
where things matter based on precision
versus being directionally right is
where all the value comes from. On your
point on experimentation,
I'm curious how much this matters and
this is something that I mentally
struggle with sometimes as well. You
mentioned the technology is constantly
changing. So by experimenting or getting
better with certain skill sets that
eventually the models are going to be
able to do on their own, how much
difference do you see in investors or
yourself when you experiment with
different things in creative ways when
you know that there's a standard decent
quality way that you can solve it
already? I know it's a broad question
just about experimentation as a skill
set, but I am curious if you've noticed
any patterns with the clients that you
work with or you yourself and some of
your teammates
>> in an evolving technology like this. I
think spending some 15% of your time on
experimentation
is really important because
unlike past technologies,
one the underlying models are changing
but two the capability frontier is
evolving as well and is quite jagged and
there are a lot of undiscovered for lack
of a better term capabilities that you
can pick up on well before others do.
And so having a process by which folks
experiment and really spending some time
pushing the models can be one helpful in
its own right, but two gives you a
better intuition of where the models are
today and maybe where they're going. So
to add a little specificity to that, I
and we at Portrait have plenty of tasks
like this. And even me personally, I
have some tasks where I know the models
can't do this today or maybe they can do
a small percentage of the time, but
anytime there's a new model that comes
out, I run my suite of 10 different
exercises across it. And I one can get a
feel for how much of a leap this model
is, but two, I might now need to update
where I think the edge of that
capability frontier is. And a lot of
times once you start doing that process,
it kind of builds on itself where you
might have an experiment. Maybe it is
building a cost curve and how that's
shifted. That's a type of task that can
take a long time and be challenging and
now the model can start doing it. Well,
great. Now you start having ideas of,
well, I wonder if I layer in a long-term
cost curve versus a marginal cost curve.
And there are different things you can
start coming up with for ways you could
actually apply it within the research
process today. So I would say for
anybody certainly companies do this but
individual investors have a suite of 10
different things where if the models
could do it would be great and just
constantly run these against the model
and once they unable to do it save that
template and reuse it as part of your
research process when working on a name.
So I think those are some of the things
that where experimentation can pay a lot
of dividends. I would buck at this in
experimentation, but one of the things
that you laid out when you talked to
Brett from Fundamental Edge was just
writing prompts in different forms. So,
start out with the most simple prompt
that you know is probably going to give
you a very broad mediocre answer. Then
take it layer down in more detail and
specify more detail and then see how the
responses change based on how you're
instructing it via prompts. I did it a
bit and it made me appreciate how it's
sensitive to maybe the ordering of
questions or if I specify the ordering
of questions and when I'm loading into
the context window and it doesn't just
impact that single exercise. It makes
you appreciate this is a technology that
really doesn't have many buttons that
tell you, oh, this is four-wheel drive
that I use in this condition. It is just
a chat and you have to play around with
it yourself. And just on that, I think
one thing that's really cool that I
mentioned earlier with the way I write
prompts is I think about sending an
email to someone overseas. The
difference with an LLM is that the
response is for all intents and purposes
instinct. The real insight I think comes
from doing exactly what you just
described, which is iterate on this. The
cost of sending a single query is
trivial. Start simple. Start adding
complexity as it's helpful. It's really
like a two-way dance to end up in a spot
where the AI really is acting like a
useful analyst. And you don't need to
wait overnight to get the content to
then see how I give feedback. You can
give that feedback real time and adjust
things. And that becomes super super
powerful. Your prompts are loaded into
portrait for whether it's primers or
whatnot. And you see the layer the
levels of detail that go into those. And
it's actually quite helpful. It made me
feel a little down on myself in terms of
what I was prompting prior to seeing
those. But I think yeah, it definitely
rings true. Taking it up a level, I have
seen quite a few individuals who are
getting a lot of value out of AI, but it
almost feels like it's siloed. You could
have two individuals at the same fund
that use entirely different tools and
they're getting value. Obviously, the
enterprise or the fund is benefiting
from all of it, but it doesn't
necessarily feel strategically aligned
or there's too much collaboration in
regards to it. Have you noticed anything
in terms of best practices for funds
just to get some type of adoption that's
aligned or collaborative? Because
investing is ultimately a lot of the
research is building conviction and
people build that in different ways.
It's challenging to mandate changes in a
research process because if I was at my
last job and the head of the firm said,
"Okay, now you must use only cellside
models for your models." I would really
struggle. I can certainly sympathize
with I know a lot of firms have have
been trying top down to say, "Hey, we
don't want to fall behind on AI. You
need to start using such and such tool."
And I think that can sometimes work in
certain ways, but in other ways it can
backfire and people push back. What I've
seen the most adoption and firms that
are taking the most advantage of this,
I'd say, is finding the right balance
between having firmwide initiatives that
don't force people to change their
behavior while letting individuals
experiment and figure out where AI is
going to be additive and reducing
friction without negatively impacting
conviction. So for instance, just using
Porsche as an example, there are firms
where at the firm level, we spend a lot
of time building idea generation screens
that are super bespoke to them and their
process and we just run those like an
outsourced analyst. And that's really
value ad because all we're doing is
we're not asking anyone to change their
process. They just get a bunch of really
interesting pitches that now they can
spend time on if they want. And
similarly, the thesis monitoring has
become a really big thing. And the nice
thing about thesis monitoring is it
doesn't require a change in process. All
we're doing is we take a ticker and
maybe your investment thesis and then
we're just pulling in data points that
at least our system believes could be
really helpful and incremental to your
thinking. And again, that doesn't
require anything new. It just requires
looking at a new insight when it arrives
and ignoring it if it's not relevant.
Whereas, I think for the actual
day-to-day asking queries, building
outputs, it really just depends on the
user. And obviously working with a firm
that specializes in this and has built
software specifically for this vertical
can be really helpful for driving
adoption because unlike a general tool
like chat GBT, someone building software
in their space can customize the UX
around the specific workflows. But
ultimately I think that adoption has to
happen bottoms up and people need to
feel comfortable with it to be able to
continue making high quality investment
decisions and to the extent people have
changed their process and many people
have they've done so because they feel
trust in it and I think building that
trust has to happen on the individual
level.
>> Yeah it's actually an interesting
perspective that I somehow hadn't
thought about but when it comes to any
type of investment research and
investment process people do it all
differently within the same fund. They
might have the same core things that
they look for, but the path to get there
is quite different and even model
formats. I can remember many of
arguments over having a single specified
template and people moving off of that.
So yeah, I think there's a lot to that
and maybe that opened my eyes a little
bit on the practices that firms or
individuals can do in terms of investing
in things that maybe aren't obvious in
value today, but as the technology
evolves, maybe they'll be able to
leverage more. And I mentioned before we
talked about there's the famous example
of the sports analytics teams that had
been tracking data well before sports
analytics were a thing and they were
only able to really benefit from all
those data practices decades into the
future. But the teams that never kept up
with it, it's really hard to go back in
time. So are there exercises or
practices that you think funds or
individuals can start to implement that
will pay off in time? Obviously
everything we spoke about earlier with
experimentation certainly applies here.
But I think one thing that is going to
be really important and already was
historically but I think carries a lot
more weight going forward is just the
importance of documentation of thinking
and decisions and research. Essentially
these models the usefulness of them
rises exponentially with the amount of
context they're given. As the model
context length expands and as their
agentic reasoning gets more heavily
utilized to do longer running tasks and
they ultimately shift from being a
helpful research tool to something that
lives within a firm and can execute a
research process, their ability to do it
is going to be a function of how much
data they have on how you and your firm
operates. So I think firms where they
have documented memos and even write up
short paragraphs on why they made a
trading decision, it's hard to know
Xanti which data is going to be used and
how. But I think it's a pretty
reasonable bet that having that data at
a minimum is helpful for the humans, but
will certainly be helpful for the
machines because I think a moment ago
were speaking about adoption challenging
is loading in that context. It's the
same challenge you goes when you hire a
junior analyst. Needing to teach them
everything about how you think and your
past trading history with a given name
and all that information just takes a
ton of time to convey. And so to the
extent that that data can be captured in
real time, that forms an enormously
valuable source of IP that will make AI
unique to you. And again, it's a little
hard to know upfront how that's going to
be used. And it probably takes some
creativity to figure it out, but hard to
imagine two or three years from now that
every piece of data isn't being used
within a model that is operating within
the context of a fund.
>> It's a perfect example. I could speak to
on-ramping at places where all they had
were the memos which were the buy and
sell decisions for positions which are
valuable in some ways but they're
usually overly polished versus those
that after earnings they would have
their quick blurb maybe Amazon entered
the space and it was something to
monitor and then a month later they had
a meeting with the management team and
it made them feel a little worse off and
then another quarter comes out and it's
clear Amazon's impacting them and the
memo might to say Amazon's movement, but
to see the thought process and how the
team makes decisions. There was
something very valuable in me getting up
to speed. Again, I think it goes back to
that lens of almost thinking of it like
a team member in the same way that you
would give them the most ammo to align
with how you work and what you do. Going
back to some of the quick hitting
questions, thinking about down the road
and where we're going, I already brought
up context windows. We'll use LLMs.
Again, just thinking about some of the
most used tools. When you think about
where investors or where you personally
find the context window advantage has
the most impact or how you adjust for
the challenge that I think many
investors face, which is I want to get
as much information in there as
possible, but sometimes I'm limited by
it. How do you approach that? And how
much do you think you should worry about
that as an investor? It's super
dependent on what tool you're using and
in what context you're using it and the
task. To go a little deeper on that, the
context windows obviously have been
expanding although really in the past
year they've been flat with Gemini at
around a million, GPT I think around
400,000 and Opus or Clawude around 200.
Where the models have gotten more
capable is using that context. Well, I
think historically models struggled. If
you loaded in, I don't know, the last
five 10ks and let's say a 10k is like
100,000 tokens. So 500,000 the models
historically be really good at say if
you ask what was SGNA in 2023, they call
that a needle in a hay stack problem.
They would struggle if you said build a
three-statement model using these. The
model needs to apply its attention
across lots of different pieces of the
context window simultaneously. I think
that still is a roughly helpful rule of
thumb which is the models are generally
if you're using a ton of context you do
better if you're loading that in because
you're looking for very specific data
points. That being said, I think a
change versus if we had this
conversation 3 months ago is models have
gotten very good at using the context
intelligently.
If you're thinking about building a
project in portrait or notebook LM or
something like that, I wouldn't really
hold back. I would give it pretty much
the entire corpus and you're seeing this
a lot in software engineering where
claude code and other aentic coding
tools are very capably exploring super
long context in a way that is efficient
and focused on the task at hand. So in
the same way I wouldn't give a junior
analyst a task and say these are the
only four documents you can use. You'd
want them to ultimately have the agency
to choose what content they're going to
use and I think that holds true. All
that being said, if you're going to use
the raw model itself, you do not want to
overload the context window and use 70%
of the context window. You will see a
degregation in any complex task. In that
case, you should break it down. But
hopefully the much easier way to do this
is use a tool that manages that
complexity already. So you don't need to
worry about okay, what percent of the
context window am I utilizing and so
forth is how I think about that today.
on memory. I think it's obvious where as
memory has now been implemented in a lot
of these tools, it customizes to you and
that iteration again I'm going to
overuse the lens of the employee
overseas that you're creating a better
more aligned working environment. Are
there any non-obvious impacts that you
think memory will have? I think the
interesting thing about memory is today
as it's implemented it's far worse than
a human's memory. It is super limited.
It's expensive in the sense of having
deep memories takes up a lot of context.
It lacks a lot of the nuance of our
memories are really useful both for
specific facts but more so for the
abstract concepts that they create and
that we learn. When you think of those
memories like a lot of times that
connection is where they become really
powerful and that's become pattern
recognition for investments. So in the
near term, I think memories is a useful
tool for all the obvious reasons that
you can think about in terms of just
adding more context that persists in the
context window. Longer term, everyone
knows all the fallibility of human
memory. And this is a little bit of my
pay grade in terms of the actual ML
research and how memory is being
incorporated in different ways. But you
could imagine any one of the
architectures that are being
experimented today with memory and
having short-term memory and longerterm
memory and the ability to look up
memories if implemented correctly both
in terms of how the models are trained
as well as the hardnesses around them.
Imagine having a model that has lived
every single one of a firm's investments
and maybe things they even passed on.
There's a world where it becomes so much
more powerful than any given human. I
look at some of the investors I've
worked for and they just have this
insanely eerily intuitive judgment about
things. A lot of that is not just memory
specific facts, but memory that comes
from experience and scar tissue. There's
a world where that certainly could exist
in models. And I think in some sense
people talk about AGI being the ability
to be generally intelligent. I think a
really interesting test for a model if
it's AGI is can it predict the future?
you need a really good world model and
understanding of lots of variables to
predict the future and that's what an
investor does and memory is clearly a
really important ingredient to that. So
I'd say near-term I'm a little bearish
on just how big of an impact it's going
to be relative to just copy pasting that
context into a window. But longer term I
think that's the unlock where this goes
from being the useful tool to the real
core driver of a lot of the research a
firm is doing. Well, I'll separate it.
Near-term, I'm almost taking away that
it might be more valuable to limit the
memory, therefore reducing the context
window and investing more into the
prompt that I'm using. I know they're
not like for like, but ultimately memory
is customizing to you. And if you could
just put that in the prompt, that might
be more beneficial than sucking up
memory.
>> It's a near-term convenience. So in
other words, if there's knowledge you
want to impart and every single time you
interact with the model, yeah, that
should live in memory. Or if there are
aspects of working on a name and you've
maybe done 20 queries on a particular
name, you maybe want some sense of the
memory in living in the model. So if you
reference something back or it already
knows it's did XYZ analysis, it can do
that. I think that's where it's useful.
It's a bit of a shortcut for just
loading in context that you don't have
to repeat. I definitely would recommend
spending a lot of time being thoughtful
around to the extent you can manage the
system prompt and off-the-shelf tool or
anything like that. I think we're just
very early innings from a technical
perspective tapping what it means to
really utilize memory in a thoughtful
way and and just to illustrate that and
these models have such incredible world
knowledge by essentially reading the
entire internet in their pre-training.
So they clearly have the capability to
store in their weight a lot of knowledge
and then learn important concepts from
that knowledge that leads to things like
reasoning. So it's just a matter of time
before that same paradigm applies to
continual learning on the job. And that
to me is going to be really really fun.
Yeah, I do think about if Bridgewater's
really been recording all those meetings
for all of this time, what all of that
[laughter]
that input could do eventually and what
could happen with that technology. I
don't even have an idea of what it could
be, but it just feels pretty unique and
seeing how people are testing this even
with their own personal recordings and
creating their own things. The last
thing I wanted to talk about because it
gets brought up, it's a buzzword, it has
very practical applications, but agentic
AI, the definition gets a little bit
fuzzy sometimes, but just thinking about
agentic AI as a topic and as it applies
to investors, if you could just talk
about where that's going, how you would
even categorize that within the various
tools and anything else you would
mention on that. So there's lots of
definitions of agentic AI. I think of it
essentially as the model has the
capability to reason, reflect, take
action, reflect on those actions
ultimately in the pursuit of a goal. And
there's obviously different levels of
scaffolding and constriction around what
the model can and can't do. What's
really exciting, especially now, is
agents have started to work. And
interestingly, when we first started
Portrait, we tried and we did actually
have an agent that was running using
GBT4
and it was so hard to get to work. And
the way you got it to work was you had
to be so prescriptive about what the
model could and couldn't do. I think our
system prompt was 30,000 tokens or
something crazy. really had to limit it
because at any given time the model if
it started going down the wrong
direction it didn't have the ability to
self-correct and be thoughtful about
what it's learned and how it should
adjust its plan and that required just a
ton of prompting. What's cool today and
I think what what's happening in
software engineering is the leading edge
of what's going to eventually happen in
investment research and really any other
knowledge field is the models have now
become smart enough to do longer running
tasks through using tools and updating
its thinking process as it goes. And
you're seeing this with things like
cloud code and codeex where people are
leaving these models alone for multiple
hours and it is dynamically operating
like a software engineer to understand a
codebase, make changes to it, test
things out, see an error, go look at the
trace and figure out why there's a
problem, make a fix. That type of
thinking is certainly really challenging
and that now works. The nice thing about
code is it's the perfect environment for
these models to figure this type of
capability out because one, it's all
just text files at the end of the day.
It's all contained usually within a
repo. So all the context is locally
available and it's super verifiable. The
code either runs or it doesn't.
Investment research is obviously much
different. None of those things are
true. The context is in many different
forms and very broad and some is more
accessible than others. It's also much
more qualitative in terms of output. But
the form factor of can these models
reason iteratively and arrive at complex
answers that require onthe-go changes of
plans. The answer is yes. And it's just
a matter of the engineering work to get
those models into the right context so
that they can operate like a junior
analyst and ultimately like a senior
analyst doing longunning research. It's
definitely still a buzzword, but there's
a lot more meat behind that buzzword
than there was maybe a year ago. the
point on code and I often bring up chess
these constrained environments that are
still very complex but they're
constrained by certain things you tend
to see more of a clean iteration cycle
and more productivity that comes out of
it and the more complex and adaptive the
system the harder it is to control the
evolution so it's one that I think will
be interesting to see how it all evolves
but this has been fascinating thank you
for going on some more philosophical
tangents in addition to the very
tangible use cases. It's been a
pleasure. So, thank you for sharing the
knowledge with us.
>> Thank you. It's been really fun. [music]
>> To find more episodes of breakdowns
ranging from Costco to Visa to Madna or
to [music] sign up for our weekly
summary, check out join colossus.com.
That's jolsus.com.
[music]